# University of Alberta Collaborations
On our first day in Alberta(August 25, 2015), we met professors at University of Alberta who are currently doing research on land reclamation of Oil Sands.We were honoured to acquire his deep insight about the liquid tailings ponds. The adverse effects of tailings ponds how they have affected our land, air and water are well-known facts. The major issue we come across when talking about oil sands tailings pond is their density. Tailings water is thick dark liquid filled with primarily organic toxins. The thickness of the liquid makes it hard to use and reclaim as clean water. 
-add picture- Professor Thundat teaching(Dawood's head)

Above picture shows Dr. Thundat explaining his work with tailings water.

__Professor Thomas Thundat__ along with his research team has stepped ahead to engage modern technology into __land reclamation__ by using liquid densification techniques. He gave us important insight about our project along with it's potential application in industry with the use of our membrane bioreactor, which mostly deals with __water reclamation__. 

<Add UofA picture>
Both Professors with our group
Above picture shows our team with Professor Thundat and Professor Mohtada at the end of our tour.
Professor Thundat went out of his way to help us improve our membrane bioreactor design by allowing us to meet __Professor Mohtada Sadrzadeh__ who is currently working with micro/nano pore membranes and different filteration techniques along with desgning new membranes. He gave us important insight about the types of membranes and different filteration techniques (micro-filteration, ultra-filterstion, nano-filteration) that can work optimal for our bioreactor. We were honoured to visit Dr. Thundat’s lab where __Mehrnaz Rahim__ briefed us about tailings water densification techniques. Later, we visited Professor Sadrzadeh’s lab where __Behnam Khorshidi__  explained the effectiveness of different liquid filtration techniques in detail, through membranes with pore sizes smaller than a micron.

On our second day(August 26,2015) we met __Andrew Read__ at __Pembina Institute__. According to Read and the research of the Pembina Institute, the biggest challenges to projects focused on land or water reclamation from tailings ponds is the cost to the industry, and also the question of who will absorb that cost. As it stands, there is not enough money packed away in the security funds of the government or industry to fully finance remediation of all 77 square kilometres of wet tailings, however that could change with both improved financial regulations and low-cost technologies like ours.

The part of the meeting that really resonated most with many of us was when Read mentioned that, _“previous government policies have not been effective”_. Major oil mining companies such as __Suncor__, __Syncrude Mildred Lake__, __Shell Muskeg River__ and __Shell Jackpine__ did not meet the _Directive 074–Alberta Energy Regulator_, which states the Tailings Performance and Requirements for Oil Sands Mining Schemes. Each oil company had its own set goal of Tailings Capture Requirements (%).  Not only were these companies unable to meet their requirements, even after negotiating lower standards with the regulatory bodies, but these same companies were also not penalized for not attaining this government regulation. It is understandable that operations costs are likely the biggest challenge for companies to not process more tailings pond to turn oil tailings from that yogurt consistency to a solid-brick, like we had learned from our visit to Dr. Thundat’s lab at U of A. However, the statistics that we were shown were from the 2011 to 2012 period, and according to __Read__, has not changed significantly. __Andrew Read__ was very helpful to our undergraduate team in explaining these challenges and respecting our desire to be apart of the solution to the oil tailings problem.

He explained in detail about how oil extraction has affected mother nature, our living environment and our economy. The following is a summary of his presentation:
Water has been continually depleting in the rivers at an alarming rate to meet the requirements of water consumption in order to extract oil from sub earthen oil reserves. After being used in the process of extraction, this water mixed with toxic compounds is left in the form of a thick dark liquid in tailings ponds. No effective water reclamation techniques have been in effect so far, despite regulations from the government. Since, the oil industries have not played a crucial role in water and land reclamation, the responsibility falls onto the government to restore the water and land. When we talk about government being responsible for this job, we really are talking about money out of the pockets of taxpayers to clean up the mess that they had nothing to do with. If we take a moment to consider this, it seems likely that the oil extraction industry which was supposed to be building the economy will soon lead us under huge environmental stress, destroying nature, and any effort to restore this will have to be paid by people who didn’t choose this upon themseleves.

He acknowledged that technology like ours which is cheap and effective can not only reclaim the tailings water, but also lessen the stress of increasing depletion of water in Albertan rivers. However, as of now there has been considerably low amount of tailings water that has actually been reclaimed.
